---
title: "Days 101 to 103 February 2024"
date: 2024-03-02T17:00:00-00:00
categories:
- Blog
- Central America
tags:
- panama
draft: true
---

# Day 103

The road to Boquette ends shortly after the Northern edge of the town and it is in effect a dead end, so to leave it there is no alternative but to retrace your steps back down Highway 41 in the direction of the city of David. So setting off South out of Boquette my plan was to head up to the Caribbean side of Panama and cross the border in to Costa Rica at the town of Guabito. Just out of Boquette I took Highway 10 to Gualaca and then headed North to the Caribbean coast. The road here was quite good except for the odd deep pothole or two and the views were also quite good of the volcano in the distance.

{{< fig-res res="05-101.jpg" >}}

Now at this point it is prudent to mention that although I am using the term Highway to describe the roads the only road which can truly be called a major road is Highway 1, the main Pan American highway. These other roads are minor roads of varying quality from adequate  to very poor.
As I was riding along enjoying the scenery I rounded a bend to see something in the middle of the road but I could not make out what it was. As I got nearer I saw that it was moving but I was not able to see what animal I was looking at. I stopped the bike and walked over only to see that it was a 3 toed sloth. I waited until it slowly got to the side of the road where I took a photo of it.

{{< fig-res res="06-101.jpg" >}}

Around 2 o’clock in the afternoon I had reached the town of Almirante where you can catch the ferry to the Island of Colon in the Bocas del Torros island group which are very popular with tourists. However, as I had planned to cross in to Costa Rica the following morning I gave that trip a miss and looked for somewhere to stay for the night. The choices of accommodation in this area apart from on the islands is very limited but I found a place to stay in the jungle with some indigenous Indians for $25 so I headed there but as I left the town I encountered the best stretch of road that I have found in Panama, newly laid and deserted.

{{< fig-res res="07-101.jpg" >}}

On my way I passed what looked like a small village of wooden shacks in a field, each of the buildings had a roof made from dried grass or dried banana leaves, and there appeared to be no indications or signs of modern facilities such as electricity or running water in this village.

{{< fig-res res="08-101.jpg" >}}

About 2 hours later I arrived at my destination for the evening which was a 2 roomed wooded shack with no mains electricity and an outhouse toilet and shower. The dining area was a grass roofed area next to the shack and the kitchen was under a corrugated iron roof at the back of the shack.

{{< fig-res res="09-101.jpg" >}}

{{< fig-res res="10-101.jpg" >}}

{{< fig-res res="11-101.jpg" >}}

{{< fig-res res="12-101.jpg" >}}

{{< fig-res res="13-101.jpg" >}}

{{< fig-res res="14-101.jpg" >}}

My host, Raul, even offered to take me fishing on the river in his dugout canoe in the moring but as I had planned to cross the border I reluctantly had to decline. Raul and his family were very nice people who made me very welcome. In between my broken Spanish and their broken English we got along very well. I spent the evening sitting sharing my cigars and coffee telling them my story and listening to theirs. At one point one of his sons alerted him to something at the side of their shack. I went to investigate and i was told that it was a venemous frog and to keep away from it.

{{< fig-res res="14-101.jpg" >}}

I have since researched this animal, the Smokey Jungle Frog and this is what I found. "The skin of the smoky jungle frog contains leptoxin, a lethal protein toxin"

The only electricity the Raul and his family had was generated by a solar panel on the roof of the shack that he used to charge a 12V car battery to allow them to charge their mobile phones and provide some lighting at night. As we sat under the lights, in the darkness I heard a loud noise which Raul told me was a Jaguar calling. He further told me that the Jaguars are scared of people and run away, the Pumas can attack people, but the most dangerous animal was the black panther which is not scared of people and will hunt them if it can. 

As we talked the skies opend and the tropical rain fell all night, drumming hard on the correugated iron roof. When it was time for sleep I got in to my bed under a full size mosquito net and let the drummig of the rain lull me to sleep. One of the best travel experiences that I have yet had on my journey.

Day 104 - 106

I reached the border crossing at 10 o’clock and riding up on to the bridge I was stopped by two customs officers and two guys in camouflage uniforms with a drugs dog. After a short conversation I was told to go to the immigration building and then to go the customs building, in that order, which were in the town next to the bridge.

Now all of my previous experiences with borders whilst travelling on my bike have been in Europe where all of the buildings such as immigration and customs are at the actual border crossing area and not in a town beside it. How foolish of me to assume that things would be done the same way. 

Anyway I go to immigration and get my passport stamped for exit and then I go to the customs. Oh dear, apparently I did not have the correct paperwork. I had my vehicle ownership papers and my insurance certificate but apparently I needed 4 other documents that I had to get in Panama city where my bike is registered.

The customs refused me clearance to leave without these documents and I then had to return to immigration to have my exit stamp cancelled. The bike had now been sitting on the bridge for about 1 hour so when I returned the customs guys were furious and started shouting at me. I just pleaded ignorance, performed a U turn and rode off back South the way that I had come the following day. 

I reached the city of David near to the Pacific coast around 4 o’clock and I spent two nights at a nice hostel there for $25 per night as I tried to find a way not to return to Panama city but to no avail. I then rode from David back along Highway 1 to Penonome where I stopped in a hotel for the evening, which was a little more expensive at $30 for the night and there was also no hot water in my room. 

The following morning I made a slow ride back to Panama city where I had booked in to a hotel for 28 days to give me time to negotiate all of the bureaucracy in order to get the required forms. As I reached Panama city I decided to call in to the RE dealer to organise an oil and filter change and to have the valve clearances checked as the bike has now done 2,000 miles. I would normally do it myself however I used this as an excuse to ask the salesman, who speaks good English, how I could go about obtaining the relevant forms.

It turns out that if I had used the border crossing next to the city of David on the Pacific side, the customs guys there do not ask for these forms. He told me that 2 weeks earlier he had sold 2 RE Meteors to 2 Chiliean people who had the same documentation as I have, and they crossed without any problems and were now in Guatemala. 

If only I had known!

